[DROOLS-7026] Drools 8 docs : migration guide (#4660)
kiegroup/drools: drools-docs/src/modules/ROOT/pages/migration-guide/_traditional-to-ruleunit.adoc

== Rule Unit

As introduced in xref:getting-started/index.adoc#first-rule-project_getting-started[First Rule Project], Rule Unit is a recommended style in {PRODUCT} 8. It will require some modification to your codes, but if you are going to develop cloud-native applications, Rule Unit is strongly recommended because {KOGITO} also works with Rule Unit.

.Rule Unit pom.xml
[xml,subs=attributes+]
----
    <dependency>
      <groupId>org.drools</groupId>
      <artifactId>drools-engine</artifactId>
      <version>${version.org.drools}</version>
    </dependency>
    <dependency>
      <groupId>org.drools</groupId>
      <artifactId>drools-ruleunits-impl</artifactId>
      <version>${version.org.drools}</version>
    </dependency>
    <dependency>
      <groupId>org.drools</groupId>
      <artifactId>drools-model-compiler</artifactId>
      <version>${version.org.drools}</version>
    </dependency>
----

`drools-ruleunits-impl` is required for Rule Unit APIs. `drools-model-compiler` is required to generate executable model that is also recommended in {PRODUCT} 8.

> Regarding Java codes, in {PRODUCT} 7, you create a `KieSession` from rule assets. Then insert facts and fire rules.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Regarding related Java API usage, in {PRODUCT} 7, you create a `KieSession` from rule assets. Then insert facts and fire rules.
```

.Traditional Java code
[source,java]
----
        KieServices ks = KieServices.Factory.get();
        KieContainer kcontainer = ks.getKieClasspathContainer();
        KieBase kbase = kcontainer.getKieBase();
        KieSession ksession = kbase.newKieSession();
        try {
            ksession.insert(new Measurement("color", "red"));
            ksession.insert(new Measurement("color", "green"));

            ksession.fireAllRules();
        } finally {
            ksession.dispose();
        }
----

> Using Rule Unit APIs, the Java codes would be like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using Rule Unit APIs, the resulting Java snippet would be like this:
```

.Rule Unit Java code
[source,java]
----
        MeasurementUnit measurementUnit = new MeasurementUnit();
        RuleUnitInstance<MeasurementUnit> instance = RuleUnitInstanceFactory.instance(measurementUnit);
        try {
            measurementUnit.getMeasurements().add(new Measurement("color", "red"));
            measurementUnit.getMeasurements().add(new Measurement("color", "green"));

            instance.fire();
        } finally {
            instance.dispose();
        }
----

> In Rule Unit, instantiate `RuleUnitInstance` instead of `KieSession`. Add facts to `DataSource` property instead of `insert`. Boilerplate codes (e.g. `KieServices`, `KieContainer`, `KieBase` ... ) are eliminated. Instead, one more class `Unit` has to be defined.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Rule Unit, instantiate `RuleUnitInstance` instead of `KieSession`. Add facts to `DataSource` property instead of `insert`. Generic KIE API call (e.g. `KieServices`, `KieContainer`, `KieBase` ... ) are no longer needed. Instead, one more class `Unit` has to be defined.
```

Author: > *Generic KIE API calls

Sure, I'll fix it with a further commit :)

        return measurements;
    }

    public Set<String> getControlSet() {
        return controlSet;
    }
}
----

This Unit class associates rules (`DRL`) and inserted facts (`DataSource`), so it helps you to manage the relationship.

DRL syntax style also changes.

.Traditional DRL
[source]
----
global java.util.Set controlSet;

rule "will execute per each Measurement having ID color"
when
	Measurement( id == "color", $colorVal : val )
then
	controlSet.add($colorVal);
end
----

.Rule Unit DRL
[source]
----
unit MeasurementUnit;

rule "will execute per each Measurement having ID color"
when
	/measurements[ id == "color", $colorVal : val ]
then
	controlSet.add($colorVal);
end
----

Firstly, declare `unit`. Don't need to declare `global`, because `controlSet` is a field of `MeasurementUnit`. Traditional `global` usage would become Unit's field. In addition, a main difference is OOPath notation in LHS. It is described in details at xref:language-reference/index.adoc#con-drl-rules-conditions_drl-rules[Rule conditions in DRL]. You should change from the class name (`Measurement`) to `DataSource` property name in the Unit class (`measurements`).

> These changes are not negligible, but hopefully, not so difficult.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These changes are not negligible, but hopefully as this migration guide demonstrated, they are not so difficult to implement either.
```

> Firstly, declare `unit`. Don't need to declare `global`, because `controlSet` is a field of `MeasurementUnit`. Traditional `global` usage would become Unit's field. In addition, a main difference is OOPath notation in LHS. It is described in details at xref:language-reference/index.adoc#con-drl-rules-conditions_drl-rules[Rule conditions in DRL]. You should change from the class name (`Measurement`) to `DataSource` property name in the Unit class (`measurements`).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Firstly, declare `unit`. Don't need to declare `global`, because `controlSet` is a field of `MeasurementUnit`. Traditional `global` usage would become the Unit's field. In addition, the main difference is OOPath notation in LHS. It is described in detail at xref:language-reference/index.adoc#con-drl-rules-conditions_drl-rules[Rule conditions in DRL]. You should change from the class name (`Measurement`) to the `DataSource` property name in the Unit class (`measurements`).
```

> These changes are not negligible, but hopefully as this migration guide demonstrated, they are not so difficult to implement either.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These changes are not negligible, but hopefully, as this migration guide demonstrated, they are not so difficult to implement either.
```
